## Economic Impact on Crime in Chicago
Harper Chen, Jeff Mason, Brendan McDonnell

<hr> 

### Description

This project aims to analyze the relationship between crime rates and economic indicators in Chicago, including unemployment rate and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the Chicago Metro Area. The goal is to provide valuable insights for policy development and contribute to our understanding of the factors influencing crime in the city.

<hr>

### Questions

Do changes in the monthly unemployment rate result in changes in various crime types? (Overall, Property, Violent, Drug-Related)  
Do changes in the GDP of the city of Chicago result in changes in different crime types?  
Does the location within the city impact the effects of economic changes on the different crime rates?   

<hr>

## Datasets
1. Chicago Crime Dataset: The primary dataset for this project, which contains reported crime incidents in Chicago from 2001 to present. Data source: Chicago Data Portal.
2. Chicago Unemployment Rate: This dataset contains the monthly unemployment rate for the city of Chicago since 2001. Data source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
3. GDP of the Chicago Metro Area: This dataset tracks the yearly GDP of the Chicago metro area (adjusted to 2012 dollars) since 2001. Data source: Statista.

<hr>

## Project Structure
* data: Directory containing the raw and cleaned datasets.
* notebooks: Directory containing Jupyter Notebooks for data cleaning, analysis, and visualization.
* visualizations: Directory containing the output visualizations (e.g., charts and maps) generated by Tableau and PowerBI.
* final_paper: Directory containing the final paper and supporting documents.
* video_presentation: Directory containing the video presentation files.
* Tools
* Data Cleaning and Analysis: Python (with Pandas, NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib libraries)
* Spatial Analysis: Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
* Data Visualization: Tableau and PowerBI
* Communication: Discord
* Project Organization: Google Drive, Google Docs, and GitHub

<hr>

## Getting Started
* Clone this repository to your local machine.
* Install the required Python libraries by running: pip install -r requirements.txt.
* Open the Jupyter Notebooks in the notebooks directory to view and run the code.
* Access the visualizations and other project deliverables in their respective directories.

## Milestones
* Data Collection and Preparation
* Data Integration and Transformation
* Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Analysis
* Regression Analysis
* Spatial Analysis
* Data Visualization
* Finalize Project Deliverables

<hr>

## Results
Overall, GDP showed stronger relationships and correlation with all crime types than the monthly unemployment rate. The GDP data set was aggregated over a longer period of time which resulted in a smaller number of data points than unemployment rate. Further study will need to be conducted to confirm the relationship between GDP and crime rates in Chicago.   

The monthly unemployment rate showed weak correlation to the various crime rates measured within this study, with the two strongest correlation rates associated with property crimes and drug-related crimes. Analysis considering location of the crime appeared to have an impact on property crimes within Chicago, but not drug-related crimes.   

A possible explanation for the differences in results is that economic conditions have a lagging effect on certain crime rates. An initial increase in the unemployment rate may not have an immediate effect on the rate of crime, but following a period of time the changes in unemployment rate may be seen in the crime rate. The GDP results within this study provide further evidence that aggregating economic change over longer periods may help in the assessment of their effects.  


<hr>

## Application

### Aid/Social Programs
The local government can look to increase allocation of funding to drug rehabilitation and prevention programs during years of falling city GDP and increasing unemployment rates due to the increases in drug-related offenses during these periods of time.   
Additionally, the government can look to build more robust social programs to create a safety net for individuals most affected by downturns in Chicago’s economic status. Social programs built to deal with the effects of economic downturns may help to mitigate some of the factors leading to the rises in property and drug-related crime rates during these time periods.  

### Enforcement Programs
Law enforcement agencies can use economic data to try and predict upcoming surges in property crimes and develop enforcement strategies to try and curb or prevent the surges related to economic downturns.  


<hr>

## Video Link

https://youtu.be/N_I9O-yuccM

<hr>

## Final Report

https://github.com/bmcdonnell629/CS-4502-Group-6/blob/main/Group6_EconomicImpactonCrimeinChicago_Part4.pdf 

<hr>

## Contributing
This project is open to contributions. If you would like to contribute, please fork the repository and submit a pull request with your proposed changes. If you have any questions or need help, feel free to reach out to the project maintainers.

<hr>
